Transfer SEPS: deprecate `refunded` boolean, add `refunds` object to transaction records (#1128)
stellar/stellar-protocol: ecosystem/sep-0006.md

`stellar_transaction_id` | string | (optional) transaction_id on Stellar network of the transfer that either completed the deposit or started the withdrawal.
`external_transaction_id` | string | (optional) ID of transaction on external network that either started the deposit or completed the withdrawal.
`message` | string | (optional) Human readable explanation of transaction status, if needed.

> `refunded` | boolean | (**deprecated**, optional) This field is deprecated in favor of the `refund` object. Should be true if the transaction was refunded. Not including this field means the transaction was not refunded.

Reviewer: Even if we are deprecating this field, I think we need to define for this field if it is true or false for partial refunds. Looking at some other APIs for inspiration, like Stripe's Charge API, I'd be inclined to say it should be false until the transaction is fully refunded.

On that note, it is unclear why we would deprecate this field. Is there significant value in us doing so? Since we are going to support the field indefinitely it might make the API less confusing to leave it not-deprecated.

Author: >  I'd be inclined to say it should be false until the transaction is fully refunded.

That makes sense to me.

> it is unclear why we would deprecate this field. Is there significant value in us doing so?

I'm don't think the value is significant, but I think it makes more sense to have all refund-related info in a single object.

Reviewer 2: Cool! In that case, can we update the parameter description to explicitly say it's `true` for a full refund?

> `refunded` | boolean | (**deprecated**, optional) This field is deprecated in favor of the `refunds` object. Should be true if the transaction was refunded in full. Partial refunds can still be expressed using the `refunds` object.

Reviewer: Marking this field as deprecated is still ambiguous to me. What are our plans with the field? For backwards compatibility we are still likely to support it indefinitely since removing support seems like it would have very little value. Do we need to deprecate it?

> `refunded` | boolean | (**deprecated**, optional) This field is deprecated in favor of the `refunds` object. Should be true if the transaction was refunded in full. Partial refunds can still be expressed using the `refunds` object.

Reviewer: Suggested edits:
```suggestion
`refunded` | boolean | (**deprecated**, optional) This field is deprecated in favor of the `refunds` object. True if the transaction was refunded in full. False if the transaction was partially refunded or not refunded. For more details about any refunds, see the `refunds` object.
```

> `refund` | object | (optional) An object describing any on or off-chain refund associated with this transaction. The schema for this object is defined in the [Refund Object Schema](#refund-object-schema) section below.

Reviewer: I think we should name this field `refunds` because it is going to provide us with information about related refunds, and their aggregate affect. The name `refund` implies to me that it contains a single refund.

* `too_large` -- deposit/withdrawal size exceeded `max_amount`.
* `error` -- catch-all for any error not enumerated above.

### Refund Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------

> `type` | string | One of `partial` or `full`

Reviewer: I think we can drop this field, since it overlaps with the existing top-level `refunded` field. The top-level refunded field could indicate if the transaction has been fully refunded or not, and the presence of any refunds in the list will indicate that the transaction is partially refunded.

Author: I'm not a huge fan of this because I can see a client misinterpreting `refunded: false` to mean that there were no refund payments whatsoever. 

The SEP currently doesn't define the concept of a partial refund, so any client that checks the `refunded` attribute today almost certainly interprets `refunded: false` to mean no value was refunded. From that perspective, we'd be redefining what `refunded: false` means, which I think is more problematic than deprecating the field.

Reviewer: The type field may be more descriptive, but since we have another field that already communicates the same thing it feels like we're improving something that still carries the same cost of continuing to use the thing we already have.

Reviewer 2: Clients should be able to figure out if this is a total or partial refund by comparing `refunds.amount_refunded` with `amount_in` like you described in the field `amount_refunded` below.

Author: Oh, thats a good point, I'll remove it.

> `total_refunded` | string | The total amount refunded to the user, in units of `amount_in_asset`. If `type` is `full`, this amount must match `amount_in`.

Reviewer: I suggest we use the term amount here so that it is not ambiguous to this being an amount or a count.
```suggestion
`amount_refunded` | string | The total amount refunded to the user, in units of `amount_in_asset`. If `type` is `full`, this amount must match `amount_in`.
```

Author: Thats fine by me 👍

`payments` | array | A list of objects containing information on the individual payments made back to the user. The schema for these objects is defined in the section below.

#### Refund Transactions Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------

> `refund_payment_id` | string | The payment ID that can be used to identify the refund payment. This is either a Stellar transaction hash or an off-chain payment identifier, such as a reference number provided to the user when the refund was initiated.

Reviewer: This isn't going to be a unique ID since there's nothing stopping an off-chain system from having overlapping IDs with Stellar transactions. Is that okay?

Author: If I understand this scenario, you're saying that an off-chain system could use the Stellar hash as their own ID? Therefore the ID would be both `stellar` and `external`?

> `refund_payment_id` | string | The payment ID that can be used to identify the refund payment. This is either a Stellar transaction hash or an off-chain payment identifier, such as a reference number provided to the user when the refund was initiated.

Reviewer: I think, given that we have an associated `_type` field, that this field could be simply named `id`. This may be less confusing since we're saying less about what the identifier is.

> `id_type` | string | `stellar` or `external`.

Reviewer: By name spacing this field it can help to associate it.
```suggestion
`refund_payment_id_type` | string | `stellar` or `external`.
```

Author: I'd rather change `refund_payment_id` to `id` and keep the `id_type` attribute as-is.

`amount` | string | The amount sent back to the user for the payment identified by `id`.

> 

Reviewer 2: It's common for exchanges to charge a refund fee in case something goes wrong with the transaction. Shouldn't we include some kind of `fee` field as well?

Reviewer 2: For Stellar network payments, the anchor could add 2 transactions, one for the refund and the other for the refund fee, but that may not be practical for bank transfers.

Author: Sure, I can add a `fee` attribute. Shouldn't we have a `total_fee` attribute or something similar alongside `amount_refunded` then?

Reviewer: Is the idea with the fee attribute that this would represented an amount that the user no longer has a right to, but was not included in the refund transaction? How would this affect the amount refunded?

For example:
- Original deposit $100.
- Anchor needs to refund $25, charges $5 per refund.
- Amount refunded = $25.
- Refunds includes a single refund with id and amount.
- What value does the `refunds.payments[0].amount` field hold? Is it $25, or $20?

Author: My understanding is that it would look like this:

* Original deposit $100
* Anchor needs to refund $25, and charges $5 per refund

So:
```json
{
  ...
  "amount_in": "100",
  "amount_out": "65",
  "amount_fee": "5",
  "refunded": false,
  "refunds": {
    "amount_refunded": "25",
    "total_fee": "5",
    "payments": [
      {
        "id": "<stellar hash>"
        "id_type": "stellar",
        "amount": "25",
        "fee": "5"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Reviewer 2: That makes sense to me too, since it's consistent with the amount_in description:

`amount_in` | string | (optional) Amount received by anchor at start of transaction as a string with up to 7 decimals. Excludes any fees charged before the anchor received the funds.
-- | -- | --

Reviewer: Got it, so is it correct that this formula should balance to zero?

```
amount_in
– amount_out
– amount_fee
+ refunds.amount_refunded
– refunds.total_fee (this should be named amount_fee I think)
```

And:
```
refunds.amount_refunded = sum(refunds.payments[].amount
refunds.total_fee = sum(refunds.payments[].fee)
```

Author: Yes thats right. In fact I think those formulas are worth including in the specifications.

Reviewer: >Amount received by anchor at start of transaction as a string with up to 7 decimals. Excludes any fees charged before the anchor received the funds.

The excludes statement is ambiguous to me. When I read it I can't tell if it means the amount_in has already had fees excluded, i.e. I'm depositing $100, but amount_in will be $95 because it excludes the fee I paid.

* `too_large` -- deposit/withdrawal size exceeded `max_amount`.
* `error` -- catch-all for any error not enumerated above.

### Refunds Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------

> `amount_refunded` | string | The total amount refunded to the user, in units of `amount_in_asset`. If `type` is `full`, this amount must match `amount_in`.

Reviewer 3: Where is this `type` definition? Should we remove it?

`amount_fee` | string | The total amount charged in fees for processing all refund payments. The sum of all `fee` values in the `payments` object list should equal this value.

> `payments` | array | A list of objects containing information on the individual payments made back to the user. The schema for these objects is defined in the section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`payments` | array | A list of objects containing information on the individual payments made back to the user as refunds. The schema for these objects is defined in the section below.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Are we assuming the same `asset_code` of the original transaction?

Author: We're assuming all refund amounts are in units of `amount_in_asset`

Reviewer: Can we make this explicit in the doc?

#### Refund Payment Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------

> `id` | string | The payment ID that can be used to identify the refund payment. This is either a Stellar transaction hash or an off-chain payment identifier, such as a reference number provided to the user when the refund was initiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`id` | string | The payment ID that can be used to identify the refund payment. This is either a Stellar transaction hash or an off-chain payment identifier, such as a reference number provided to the user when the refund was initiated. This id is not guaranteed to be unique.
```

`id_type` | string | `stellar` or `external`.
`amount` | string | The amount sent back to the user for the payment identified by `id`, in units of `amount_in_asset`.
`fee` | string | The amount charged as a fee for processing the refund, in units of `amount_in_asset`.

### Amount Formulas

The following should hold true for all transaction records, assuming `amount_in_asset` and `amount_out_asset` are the same. If they are different, the following should still hold true after converting all amounts to units of one of the assets.

```

> amount_out = amount_in - amount_fee - refunds.amount_refunded - refunds.amount_fee

Author: Yes, if the anchor charges fees for processing a refund.

```

```
refunds.amount_refunded = sum(refunds.payments[].amount)
```

```

> refunds.total_fee = sum(refunds.payments[].fee)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
refunds.amount_fee = sum(refunds.payments[].fee)
```

      "id": "82fhs729f63dh0v4",
      "kind": "withdrawal",
      "status": "completed",
      "amount_in": "510",

>       "amount_out": "495",

Reviewer 4: This should be 485.
amount_out = amount_in - amount_fee - refunds.amount_refunded - refunds.amount_fee
485 = 500 - 5 - 10 - 0

      "amount_fee": "5",
      "started_at": "2017-03-20T17:00:02Z",
      "completed_at": "2017-03-20T17:09:58Z",
      "stellar_transaction_id": "17a670bc424ff5ce3b386dbfaae9990b66a2a37b4fbe51547e8794962a3f9e6a",
      "external_transaction_id": "2dd16cb409513026fbe7defc0c6f826c2d2c65c3da993f747d09bf7dafd31093",
      "refunds": {
        "amount_refunded": "10",

>         "amount_fee": "0",

Reviewer 3: Could we add another example with fee values > 0 to help with the understanding?

Author: I just updated the example to use a non-zero refund fee.

        "payments": [

>           {

Reviewer 4: Can we add an example of `"id_type":  "external"`?

* PHP SDK: https://github.com/Soneso/stellar-php-sdk/blob/main/examples/sep-0006-transfer.md

[SEP-38]: sep-0038.md

## Changelog

> * `v3.10.0`: deprecate refunded boolean, add refund object to transaction records ([#1128](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pull/1128))

Reviewer: Could we use capitals and typical grammar?
```suggestion
* `v3.10.0`: Deprecate refunded boolean. Add refund object to transaction records. ([#1128](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pull/1128))
```
